Documentation for SHORTEST (#863)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/patterns/shortest-paths.adoc

  (wof:Station {name:"Worcester Foregate Street"}),
  (wos:Station {name:"Worcester Shrub Hill"})
SET asc.location = point({longitude: -2.10876, latitude: 51.9989}),
  bmv.location = point({longitude: -2.04978, latitude: 52.3206}),
  cnm.location = point({longitude: -2.09962, latitude: 51.8974}),
  dtw.location = point({longitude: -2.15836, latitude: 52.2682}),
  hby.location = point({longitude: -2.22112, latitude: 52.33449}),
  psh.location = point({longitude: -2.07154, latitude: 52.13055}),
  wop.location = point({longitude: -2.16003, latitude: 52.15605}),
  wof.location = point({longitude: -2.2216, latitude: 52.19514}),
  wos.location = point({longitude: -2.20941, latitude: 52.19473})
CREATE (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 7.25}]->(cnm),
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 11.29}]->(wop),
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 14.75}]->(wos),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 31.14}]->(cnm),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 6.16}]->(dtw),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 12.6}]->(wop),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.64}]->(hby),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 6.03}]->(wof),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.76}]->(wos),
  (psh)-[:LINK {distance: 4.16}]->(wop),
  (wop)-[:LINK {distance: 3.71}]->(wos),
  (wof)-[:LINK {distance: 0.65}]->(wos)

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (asc:Station {name:"Ashchurch"}),
  (bmv:Station {name:"Bromsgrove"}),
  (cnm:Station {name:"Cheltenham Spa"}),
  (dtw:Station {name:"Droitwich Spa"}),
  (hby:Station {name:"Hartlebury"}),
  (psh:Station {name:"Pershore"}),
  (wop:Station {name:"Worcestershire Parkway Ll"}),
  (wof:Station {name:"Worcester Foregate Street"}),
  (wos:Station {name:"Worcester Shrub Hill"})
CREATE (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 7.25}]->(cnm),
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 11.29}]->(wop),
  (asc)-[:LINK {distance: 14.75}]->(wos),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 31.14}]->(cnm),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 6.16}]->(dtw),
  (bmv)-[:LINK {distance: 12.6}]->(wop),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.64}]->(hby),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 6.03}]->(wof),
  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.76}]->(wos),
  (psh)-[:LINK {distance: 4.16}]->(wop),
  (wop)-[:LINK {distance: 3.71}]->(wos),
  (wof)-[:LINK {distance: 0.65}]->(wos)
----
```

Geolocations are not used by any examples.

The paths matched by a xref:patterns/fixed-length-patterns.adoc#path-patterns[path pattern] can be restricted to only the shortest (by number of hops) by including the keyword `SHORTEST k`, where `k` is the number of paths to match.
For example, the following example uses `SHORTEST 1` to return the length of the shortest path between `Worcester Shrub Hill` and `Bromsgrove`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN length(p) AS result
----

[TIP]
Note that this and the following examples on this page use a quantified relationship (as indicated by the postfix quantifier `+`) after the declared relationship pattern to search for paths that include one or more iterations of a pattern.

> For more information, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-relationships[Syntax and semantics - quantified relationships].

Reviewer: Should this go below the results?

Author: As it points out something a user may have missed in the query, I thought immediately under the query would be better.

Reviewer: Yes, I can see why you positioned it there. But I find it nice to have the query and results together, much like you see if you run the query in the CLI or Browser.

Reviewer: OK, I'll defer to you.

|===
| result

| 2

1+d|Rows:1

|===

Although the query returned a single result, there are in fact two paths that are tied for shortest:

image::patterns_shortest_tie.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

Because `1` was specified in `SHORTEST`, only one of the paths is returned.
Which one is returned is non-deterministic.

If instead `SHORTEST 2` is specified, all shortest paths in this example would be returned, and the result would be deterministic:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 2 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]

1+d|Rows:2

|===

Increasing the number of paths will return the next shortest paths.
Three paths are tied for the second shortest:

image::patterns_second_shortest_paths.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

The following query returns all three of the second shortest paths, along with the two shortest paths:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH p = SHORTEST 5 (hby:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH p = SHORTEST 5 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
```

WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===

| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcester Foregate Street", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa", "Bromsgrove"]

1+d|Rows: 5
|===

If there had been only four possible paths between the two Stations, then only those four would have been returned.

[[all-shortest]]
== `ALL SHORTEST`

An alternative way to return all paths that are tied for the shortest length is to use the keywords `ALL SHORTEST`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----

> MATCH p = ALL SHORTEST (hby)-[:LINK]-+(cnm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH p = ALL SHORTEST (wos)-[:LINK]-+(cnm)
```

WHERE hby.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND cnm.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]

1+d|Rows:2

|===

[[shortest-groups]]
== `SHORTEST k GROUPS`

To return all paths that are tied for first, second, and so on up to the kth shortest length, use `SHORTEST k GROUPS`.
For example, the following returns the first and second shortest length paths between  `Worcester Shrub Hill` and `Bromsgrove`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 2 GROUPS (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops, length(p) AS pathLength
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| stops | pathLength

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"] | 2
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"] | 2
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcester Foregate Street", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"] | 3
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"] | 3
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa", "Bromsgrove"] | 3

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

```

Missing results.

The first group includes the two shortest paths with `pathLength = 2` (as seen in the first two rows of the results), and the second group includes the three second shortest paths with `pathLength = 3` (as seen in the last three rows of the results).
If more groups are specified than exist in the graph, only those paths that exist are returned.

> For example, if the paths equal to one of the eight shortest paths are specified for `Worcester Shrub Hill` to `Bromsgrove`, only seven groups are returned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first group includes the two shortest paths with `pathLength = 2` (as seen in the first two rows of the results), and the second group includes the three second shortest paths with `pathLength = 3` (as seen in the last three rows of the results).

If more groups are specified than exist in the graph, only those paths that exist are returned.
For example, if the paths equal to one of the eight shortest paths are specified for `Worcester Shrub Hill` to `Bromsgrove`, only seven groups are returned:
```

Added line break.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 8 GROUPS (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN length(p) AS pathLength, count(*) AS numPaths
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| pathLength | numPaths

| 2 | 2
| 3 | 3
| 4 | 1
| 5 | 4
| 6 | 8
| 7 | 10
| 8 | 6

2+d|Rows: 7
|===

[[any]]
== `ANY`

The `ANY` keyword can be used to test the reachability of nodes from a given node(s).

> It returns the same as `SHORTEST 1`, but by using the ANY keyword the intent of the query is clearer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It returns the same as `SHORTEST 1`, but by using the `ANY` keyword the intent of the query is clearer.
```

For example, if the start nodes of matches are bound to either `Droitwich Spa` or `Hartlebury`, and the end nodes are bound to either `Ashchurch` or `Cheltenham Spa`, there will be four distinct pairs of start and end nodes, and therefore four partitions:

[options="header",cols="a,a"]
|===
| *Start node* | *End node*

| `Droitwich Spa` | `Ashchurch`
| `Droitwich Spa` | `Cheltenham Spa`
| `Hartlebury` | `Ashchurch`
| `Hartlebury` | `Cheltenham Spa``

|===

The following query illustrates how these partitions define the sets of results within which the shortest paths are selected.
It uses a pair of xref:clauses/unwind.adoc[`UNWIND`] clauses to generate a Cartesian product of the names of the `Stations` (all possible pairs of start node and end node), followed by the `MATCH` clause to find the shortest two groups of paths for each pair of distinct start and end `Stations`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND ["Droitwich Spa", "Hartlebury"] AS a
UNWIND ["Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa"] AS b
MATCH SHORTEST 2 GROUPS (o {name: a})-[l]-+(d {name: b})
RETURN o.name AS start, d.name AS end,
    size(l) AS pathLength, count(*) AS numPaths

> ORDER BY origin, destination, pathLength

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UNWIND ["Droitwich Spa", "Hartlebury"] AS a
UNWIND ["Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa"] AS b
MATCH SHORTEST 2 GROUPS (o:Station {name: a})-[l]-+(d:Station {name: b})
RETURN o.name AS start, d.name AS end,
    size(l) AS pathLength, count(*) AS numPaths
ORDER BY start, end, pathLength
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="4*m"]
|===

| start | end | pathLength | numPaths

| "Droitwich Spa" | "Ashchurch" | 2 | 1
| "Droitwich Spa" | "Ashchurch" | 3 | 4
| "Droitwich Spa" | "Cheltenham Spa" | 2 | 1
| "Droitwich Spa" | "Cheltenham Spa" | 3 | 1
| "Hartlebury" | "Ashchurch" | 3 | 1
| "Hartlebury" | "Ashchurch" | 4 | 4
| "Hartlebury" | "Cheltenham Spa" | 3 | 1
| "Hartlebury" | "Cheltenham Spa" | 4 | 1

4+d|Rows: 8
|===

Each partition appears twice: once for the group of shortest paths and once for the group of second shortest paths.

> For example, for the partition of `Droitwich Spa` as the origin and `Ashchurch` as the destination, the shortest path group (paths with length 2) has one path, and the second shortest path group (paths with length 3) has four paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, for the partition of `Droitwich Spa` as the start and `Ashchurch` as the end, the shortest path group (paths with length 2) has one path, and the second shortest path group (paths with length 3) has four paths.
```

To match the column names.

[[filters]]
== Pre-filters and post-filters

The position of a filter in a shortest path query will affect whether it is applied before or after selecting the shortest paths. To see the difference, first consider a query that returns the shortest path from `Hartlebury` to `Cheltenham Spa`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1
  (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'}) (()--(n))+ (:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
RETURN [stop in n[..-1] | stop.name] AS stops

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1
  (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'}) 
  (()--(n))+ 
  (:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
RETURN [stop in n[..-1] | stop.name] AS stops
----
```

Match the "stacked" format that follows, which looks neater.

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]

> 1+d|Rows:1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 1
```

|===

Note that `n[..-1]` is a slicing operation that returns all elements of `n` except the last.
If instead, the query uses a `WHERE` clause at the `MATCH` level to filter out routes that go via Bromsgrove, the filtering is applied after the shortest paths are selected.
This results in the only solution being removed, and no results being returned:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1 
  (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'}) 
  (()--(n:Station))+ 
  (:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
WHERE none(stop IN n[..-1] WHERE stop.name = 'Bromsgrove')
RETURN [stop in n[..-1] | stop.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

> 1+d|Rows:0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 0
```

|===

There are two ways to turn a post-filter without solutions into a pre-filter that returns solutions.
One is to inline the predicate into the path pattern:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1
  (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'}) 
  (()--(n:Station WHERE n.name <> 'Bromsgrove'))+
  (:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
RETURN [stop in n[..-1] | stop.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch"]

> 1+d|Rows:1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 1
```

|===

The shortest journey that avoids `Bromsgrove` is now returned.

An alternative is to wrap the path pattern and filter in parentheses (leaving the `SHORTEST` keyword on the outside):

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1
  ( (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'}) 
    (()--(n:Station))+ 
    (:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
     WHERE none(stop IN n[..-1] WHERE stop.name = 'Bromsgrove') )
RETURN [stop in n[..-1] | stop.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch"]

> 1+d|Rows:1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 1
```

|===

[[pre-filter-path-variable]]
== Pre-filter with a path variable

The previous section showed how to apply a filter before the shortest path selection by the use of parentheses.
Placing a path variable declaration before the shortest path keywords, however, places it outside the scope of the parentheses.
To reference a path variable in a pre-filter, it has to be declared inside the parentheses.

To illustrate, consider this example that returns all shortest paths from `Hartlebury` to each of the other `Stations`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'})--+(b:Station)
RETURN b.name AS destination, length(p) AS pathLength
ORDER BY pathLength, destination
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| destination | pathLength

| "Droitwich Spa" | 1
| "Bromsgrove" | 2
| "Worcester Foregate Street" | 2
| "Worcester Shrub Hill" | 2
| "Ashchurch" | 3
| "Cheltenham Spa" | 3
| "Worcestershire Parkway Ll" | 3
| "Pershore" | 4

> 2+d|Rows:8

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2+d|Rows: 8
```

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'})--+(b:Station)
WHERE length(p) % 2 = 0
RETURN b.name AS destination, length(p) AS pathLength
ORDER BY pathLength, destination
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| destination | pathLength

| "Bromsgrove" | 2
| "Worcester Foregate Street" | 2
| "Worcester Shrub Hill" | 2
| "Pershore" | 4

2+d|Rows: 4
|===

To move the predicate to a pre-filter, the path variable should be referenced from within the parentheses, and the shortest routes with an even number of stops will be returned for all the destinations:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH SHORTEST 1
  (p = (:Station {name: 'Hartlebury'})--+(b:Station) 
    WHERE length(p) % 2 = 0 )
RETURN b.name AS destination, length(p) AS pathLength
ORDER BY pathLength, destination
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| destination | pathLength

| "Bromsgrove" | 2
| "Worcester Foregate Street" | 2
| "Worcester Shrub Hill" | 2
| "Ashchurch" | 4
| "Cheltenham Spa" | 4
| "Droitwich Spa" | 4
| "Pershore" | 4
| "Worcestershire Parkway Ll" | 4

> 2+d|Rows:8

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2+d|Rows: 8
```

|===

[[shortest-path-graph-patterns]]
== Single shortest path per graph pattern

xref:patterns/non-linear-patterns.adoc#graph-patterns[Graph patterns] can contain more than one path pattern.

> The exception is when one of those path patterns has a selective shortest path keyword (For more information, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#shortest-paths-rules-selective[Syntax and semantics -> selective path selectors]), in which case it can be the only path pattern in the graph pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exception is when one of those path patterns has a selective shortest path keyword (for more information, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#shortest-paths-rules-selective[Syntax and semantics -> selective path selectors]), in which case it can be the only path pattern in the graph pattern.
```

So if this second pair of paths were selected, then the query would return no results, in contrast to the first pair of paths.
To avoid this non-determinism in the number of results, a rule is imposed whereby selective path patterns cannot be combined with any other path patterns in the same graph pattern.

If it makes sense for there to be relationships appearing more than once, the path patterns can solved by putting them in separate `MATCH` clauses:

.Valid query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (d:Station {name: 'Droitwich Spa'}),
      (w:Station {name: 'Worcestershire Parkway Ll'}),
      (c:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (d)--+(w)
MATCH q = SHORTEST 1 (d)--+(c)
RETURN [stop IN nodes(p) | stop.name] AS r1,
       [stop IN nodes(q) | stop.name] AS r2
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| r1 | r2

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll"]
| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Cheltenham Spa"]

> 2+d|Rows:1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2+d|Rows: 1
```

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"] | 3
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa", "Bromsgrove"] | 3
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

The first group includes the two shortest paths with `pathLength = 2` (as seen in the first two rows of the results), and the second group includes the three second shortest paths with `pathLength = 3` (as seen in the last three rows of the results).

If more groups are specified than exist in the graph, only those paths that exist are returned.
For example, if the paths equal to one of the eight shortest paths are specified for `Worcester Shrub Hill` to `Bromsgrove`, only seven groups are returned:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 8 GROUPS (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN length(p) AS pathLength, count(*) AS numPaths
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| pathLength | numPaths

| 2 | 2
| 3 | 3
| 4 | 1
| 5 | 4
| 6 | 8
| 7 | 10
| 8 | 6

2+d|Rows: 7
|===

[[any]]
== `ANY`

The `ANY` keyword can be used to test the reachability of nodes from a given node(s).

> It returns the same as `SHORTEST 1`, but by using the `ANY` keyword the intent of the query is clearer.

Reviewer 2: Are we sure that we want to document that `ANY` returns the same as `SHORTEST 1`? In general, this is not a hard constraint right? I am just thinking what happens if we find in the future an algorithm which can efficiently find and return a path if it exists, but maybe not necessarily the same as `SHORTEST 1` finds. Also, `SHORTEST 1` returns one of the possibly many shortest paths non-deterministically.
I would choose for a description like this: _At the moment, `ANY` is rewritten to `SHORTEST 1`, but by using the `ANY` keyword the intent of the query is clearer._

Reviewer: It originally read:

> Currently it is implemented to return one of the shortest paths between the node(s), but the keyword can be used to more clearly express the intent of the query

but the style guidance from @JPryce-Aklundh was to avoid statements like this and rather update it when and if such a change is made.

Author: Yes, @WilcoNeo - we prefer to document current functionality and update documentation whenever that changes.

There are two shortest paths from `Droitwich Spa` to `Worcestershire Parkway Ll`, one via `Worcestershire Shrub Hill`, and the other via `Bromsgrove`.
As each path pattern is looking for a single shortest path, there are two possible solutions.
For the first of those solutions, the two paths follow different relationships:

image::patterns_shortest_graph_pattern1.svg[width="400", role="middle"]

For the second solution, however, both paths go via the link between `Droitwich Spa` and `Bromsgrove`:

image::patterns_shortest_graph_pattern2.svg[width="400", role="middle"]

The problem with this is that relationships are required to be unique within a given match to a graph pattern (for more information, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#graph-patterns-rules-relationship-uniqueness[Syntax and semantics -> relationship uniqueness]).
So if this second pair of paths were selected, then the query would return no results, in contrast to the first pair of paths.
To avoid this non-determinism in the number of results, a rule is imposed whereby selective path patterns cannot be combined with any other path patterns in the same graph pattern.

> If it makes sense for there to be relationships appearing more than once, the path patterns can solved by putting them in separate `MATCH` clauses:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If it makes sense for there to be relationships appearing more than once, the path patterns can be solved by putting them in separate `MATCH` clauses:
```

If more groups are specified than exist in the graph, only those paths that exist are returned.
For example, if the paths equal to one of the eight shortest paths are specified for `Worcester Shrub Hill` to `Bromsgrove`, only seven groups are returned:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 8 GROUPS (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN length(p) AS pathLength, count(*) AS numPaths
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| pathLength | numPaths

| 2 | 2
| 3 | 3
| 4 | 1
| 5 | 4
| 6 | 8
| 7 | 10
| 8 | 6

2+d|Rows: 7
|===

[[any]]
== `ANY`

The `ANY` keyword can be used to test the reachability of nodes from a given node(s).
It returns the same as `SHORTEST 1`, but by using the `ANY` keyword the intent of the query is clearer.
For example, the following query shows all stations reachable from `Pershore` where the distance between each pair of stations is less than 6 miles:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH ANY 

>   (:Station {name: 'Pershore'})-[l:LINK WHERE l.distance < 6]-+(b:Station)

Reviewer 2: I would vote for an example where node `b` will be matched to a single node. Partitions are explained only after this example.
A quick look at this doc confused me for a second. I expected to see one result for `ANY`, but saw multiple results (not realizing that any match for `b` would lead to one result).

Reviewer: Good point. I've changed the example to be showing the existence of a path between two specific stations that satisfy a constraint.

:description: Information about finding the `SHORTEST` path patterns.
= Shortest paths

The Cypher keyword `SHORTEST` is used to find variations of the shortest paths between nodes.
This includes the ability to look for the shortest, second-shortest (and so on) paths, all available shortest paths, and groups of paths containing the same pattern length.
The `ANY` keyword, which can be used to test the reachability of nodes from a given node(s), is also explained, as is how to apply filters in queries using `SHORTEST`.

[NOTE]
`SHORTEST` functionally replaces and extends the `shortestPath()` and `allShortestPaths()` functions.

> However, both procedures can still be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, both functions can still be used.
```

  (dtw)-[:LINK {distance: 5.76}]->(wos),
  (psh)-[:LINK {distance: 4.16}]->(wop),
  (wop)-[:LINK {distance: 3.71}]->(wos),
  (wof)-[:LINK {distance: 0.65}]->(wos)
----

The paths matched by a xref:patterns/fixed-length-patterns.adoc#path-patterns[path pattern] can be restricted to only the shortest (by number of hops) by including the keyword `SHORTEST k`, where `k` is the number of paths to match.
For example, the following example uses `SHORTEST 1` to return the length of the shortest path between `Worcester Shrub Hill` and `Bromsgrove`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN length(p) AS result
----

[TIP]
Note that this and the following examples on this page use a quantified relationship (as indicated by the postfix quantifier `+`) after the declared relationship pattern to search for paths that include one or more iterations of a pattern.
For more information, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#quantified-relationships[Syntax and semantics - quantified relationships].

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| result

| 2

> 1+d|Rows:1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 1
```

|===

Although the query returned a single result, there are in fact two paths that are tied for shortest:

image::patterns_shortest_tie.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

Because `1` was specified in `SHORTEST`, only one of the paths is returned.
Which one is returned is non-deterministic.

If instead `SHORTEST 2` is specified, all shortest paths in this example would be returned, and the result would be deterministic:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 2 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]

> 1+d|Rows:2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 2
```

|===

Increasing the number of paths will return the next shortest paths.
Three paths are tied for the second shortest:

image::patterns_second_shortest_paths.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

The following query returns all three of the second shortest paths, along with the two shortest paths:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 5 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===

| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcester Foregate Street", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa", "Bromsgrove"]

1+d|Rows: 5
|===

If there had been only four possible paths between the two Stations, then only those four would have been returned.

[[all-shortest]]
== `ALL SHORTEST`

> An alternative way to return all paths that are tied for the shortest length is to use the keywords `ALL SHORTEST`:

Reviewer 3: I don't perceive this as "an alternative". _This_ is the way to return all paths that are tied for the shortest length.

Above, we achieve that by writing `SHORTEST 2`, but that obviously is not how to do that in general.

Reviewer: Good point. Changed.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH p = ALL SHORTEST (wos)-[:LINK]-+(cnm)
WHERE hby.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND cnm.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]

> 1+d|Rows:2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1+d|Rows: 2
```

Three paths are tied for the second shortest:

image::patterns_second_shortest_paths.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

The following query returns all three of the second shortest paths, along with the two shortest paths:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = SHORTEST 5 (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(bmv:Station)
WHERE wos.name = "Worcester Shrub Hill" AND bmv.name = "Bromsgrove"
RETURN [n in nodes(p) | n.name] AS stops
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===

| stops

| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Worcester Foregate Street", "Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll", "Bromsgrove"]
| ["Worcester Shrub Hill", "Ashchurch", "Cheltenham Spa", "Bromsgrove"]

1+d|Rows: 5
|===

If there had been only four possible paths between the two Stations, then only those four would have been returned.

[[all-shortest]]
== `ALL SHORTEST`

To return all paths that are tied for shortest length, use the keywords `ALL SHORTEST`:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----

> MATCH p = ALL SHORTEST (wos)-[:LINK]-+(cnm)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MATCH p = ALL SHORTEST (wos:Station)-[:LINK]-+(cnm:Station)
```

       [stop IN nodes(q) | stop.name] AS r2
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| r1 | r2

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Worcestershire Parkway"]
| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Cheltenham Spa"]

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

== Planning shortest path queries

This section describes the operators used when planning shortest path queries.
For readers not familiar with Cypher execution plans and operators, it is recommended to first read the section xref:planning-and-tuning/execution-plans.adoc[].

There are two operators used to plan `SHORTEST` queries:

* xref:planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail.adoc#query-plan-stateful-shortest-path-all[`StatefulShortestPath(All)`] - uses a unidirectional breadth-first search algorithm to find shortest paths from a previously matched start node to an end node that has not yet been matched.

* xref:planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail.adoc#query-plan-stateful-shortest-path-into[`StatefulShortestPath(Into)`] - uses a bidirectional breadth-first search (BFS) algorithm, where two simultaneous BFS invocations are performed, one from the left boundary node and one from the right boundary node.

> `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` is used by the planner when both boundary nodes in the shortest path have been matched in a `MATCH` clause previous to that containing the `SHORTEST` keyword.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`StatefulShortestPath(Into)` is used by the planner when both boundary nodes in the shortest path are estimated to match at most one node each.
```

> It is also used when both boundary nodes match at most one node each.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

So if this second pair of paths were selected, then the query would return no results, in contrast to the first pair of paths.
To avoid this non-determinism in the number of results, a rule is imposed whereby selective path patterns cannot be combined with any other path patterns in the same graph pattern.

If it makes sense for there to be relationships appearing more than once, the path patterns can be solved by putting them in separate `MATCH` clauses:

.Valid query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (d:Station {name: 'Droitwich Spa'}),
      (w:Station {name: 'Worcestershire Parkway Ll'}),
      (c:Station {name: 'Cheltenham Spa'})
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (d)--+(w)
MATCH q = SHORTEST 1 (d)--+(c)
RETURN [stop IN nodes(p) | stop.name] AS r1,
       [stop IN nodes(q) | stop.name] AS r2
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*m"]
|===
| r1 | r2

| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Worcestershire Parkway Ll"]
| ["Droitwich Spa", "Bromsgrove", "Cheltenham Spa"]

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> == Planning shortest paths queries

Reviewer: I don't know if there are other cases where the documentation of the operators is included with the conceptual documentation, but it doesn't seem particularly necessary for SHORTEST. Shouldn't this just be one and the same as the changes under `planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail` ?

Author: There are a few such instances, where a discussion of the operators bolsters the conceptual explanation of a feature (e.g. the pages on runtime concepts), and this is another case where it is warranted, I think.

This section describes the operators used when planning shortest path queries.
For readers not familiar with Cypher execution plans and operators, it is recommended to first read the section xref:planning-and-tuning/execution-plans.adoc[].

There are two operators used to plan `SHORTEST` queries:

* xref:planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail.adoc#query-plan-stateful-shortest-path-all[`StatefulShortestPath(All)`] - uses a unidirectional breadth-first search algorithm to find shortest paths from a previously matched start node to an end node that has not yet been matched.

* xref:planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail.adoc#query-plan-stateful-shortest-path-into[`StatefulShortestPath(Into)`] - uses a bidirectional breadth-first search (BFS) algorithm, where two simultaneous BFS invocations are performed, one from the left boundary node and one from the right boundary node.

> `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` is used by the planner when both boundary nodes in the shortest path have been matched in a `MATCH` clause previous to that containing the `SHORTEST` keyword.

Reviewer: The wording makes this seem to be a plan that is decided at runtime, rather than based on cardinality estimates. For example, on the UK railway dataset I get only one node matching each end node pattern, but it is still planned as `StatefulShortestPath(All)`:
```
PROFILE
MATCH (n:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"}), (m:Station WHERE m.name CONTAINS "Vic")
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (n)((l)-[e:LINK]-(r) WHERE e.distance < 10){,5}(m)
RETURN p
```

Reviewer 2: For me a Cartesian Product is used to plan the first `MATCH` clause and then a `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` is used. @sherfert Could it be that a rewrite merges both `MATCH` clause together?

Reviewer: On an empty database it does. But with the uk railway dataset it plans this:

```
Planner COST

Runtime PIPELINED

Runtime version 5.21

Batch size 128

+----------------------------+----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------+
| Operator                   | Id | Details                                                | Estimated Rows | Rows | DB Hits | Memory (Bytes) | Page Cache Hits/Misses | Time (ms) | Pipeline      |
+----------------------------+----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------+
| +ProduceResults            |  0 | p                                                      |              0 |    1 |      22 |              0 |                    7/0 |     2.486 |               |
| |                          +----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+               |
| +Projection                |  1 | (n)-[e*]->(m) AS p                                     |              0 |    1 |       1 |                |                    1/0 |     1.949 |               |
| |                          +----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+               |
| +StatefulShortestPath(All) |  2 | SHORTEST 1 (n) ((`l`)-[`e`]-(`r`)){0, 5} (m)           |              0 |    1 |    3107 |          89084 |                 1033/0 |    57.485 | In Pipeline 1 |
| |                          |    |         expanding from: n                              |                |      |         |                |                        |           |               |
| |                          |    |     inlined predicates: cache[e.distance] < $autoint_2 |                |      |         |                |                        |           |               |
| |                          |    |                         e:LINK                         |                |      |         |                |                        |           |               |
| |                          |    |                         m.name CONTAINS $autostring_1  |                |      |         |                |                        |           |               |
| |                          |    |                         m:Station                      |                |      |         |                |                        |           |               |
| |                          +----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------+
| +NodeIndexSeek             |  3 | RANGE INDEX n:Station(name) WHERE name = $autostring_0 |              1 |    1 |       2 |            376 |                    0/2 |     0.432 | In Pipeline 0 |
+----------------------------+----+--------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------+

Total database accesses: 3132, total allocated memory: 89404
```
So it depends on an estimate (which in this case turns out to be wrong) at plan time. It can't know for sure how many will match the CONTAINS predicate. The current wording suggests it will find out after the MATCH is executed and choose the SSP(Into) operator then.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I see. This clearly illustrates as issue with the current wording (and with my understanding of the code). 

When the query looks like this:
```
PROFILE
MATCH p = SHORTEST 1 (n:Station {name: "Denmark Hill"})((l)-[e:LINK]-(r) WHERE e.distance < 10){,5}(m:Station WHERE m.name CONTAINS "Vic")
RETURN p
```

Then it is based on estimates for the number of matches for `n` and `m`. Since the planner does not know that `m` will match with only one node, `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` will not be chosen.

However, for the query consisting of two `MATCH` clauses, my understanding was that the first `MATCH` clause would be planned before the second `MATCH` clause, connecting them using an `apply` operator. In that case, the second `MATCH` clause always gets as argument a single match for `n` and `m`. This would result is planning a `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` operator. This is clearly not happening. It looks like both `MATCH` clauses are merged together, which would make a lot of sense. I was only not aware of this step.

| |                          +----+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+                        |           |                     |
| +NodeByLabelScan           |  4 | b:Station                                                                               |             10 |    9 |      10 |            376 |                    3/0 |     2.487 | Fused in Pipeline 0 |
+----------------------------+----+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+
----

However, the heuristic decision to favor `StatefulShortestPath(All)` can lead to worse query performance.
To have the planner choose the `StatefulShortestPath(Into)`, rewrite the query using a xref:subqueries/call-subquery.adoc[`CALL` subquery].
This is because the `CALL` subquery is executed for each incoming row.

> Thus, in the below query, both `a` and `b` are matched to exactly one `Station` node respectively which enables the planner to use `StatefulShortestPath(Into)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, in the below query, both `a` and `b` are matched to exactly one `Station` node respectively for each invocation of the `CALL` subquery. Therefore, the planner knows that `a` will be bound to one `Station` node and `b` will be bound to one `Station` node within the `CALL` subquery. This enables the planner to use `StatefulShortestPath(Into)` for each invocation of the `CALL` subquery.
```
